uh oh you're having a bad day
those two red dots on your ankle look
really bad buddy
looks like you've been bitten by a snake
you have no idea if it was venomous or
not
so here's what might happen next
if it wasn't venomous consider yourself
lucky you're probably gonna be fine
still any snakes fangs carry thousands
of bacteria on them
and when they penetrate the skin these
little pests get into your blood to
wreak havoc
inside your body the most terrifying of
them cause
tetanus a severe condition that's
incurable if you don't get medical help
in advance
or still you might be that unfortunate
person to have an allergy to snake
saliva
like bees or peanuts oh yeah peanuts can
be shady
when enzymes in the saliva mix with your
blood
your body starts trying to get rid of
them it doesn't realize it's basically
fighting itself
so the conflict quickly escalates and
you begin feeling nauseous and weak
eventually it becomes hard to breathe
and you may even
faint so even if you've been bitten by a
non-venomous snake
call for help pronto
then there's a worse scenario the snake
was
indeed venomous every snake species has
its own kind of venom that acts
differently from others
let's see ah it can affect either heart
and nerves
muscles or blood vessels it always
starts with a sharp pain
at the place of bite the snake opened
its mouth wide
punctured your flesh with its two upper
face and injected its venom through the
channels
inside them the venom goes straight into
your bloodstream
and that's when the real black magic
begins
[Music]
if the bite marks are clearly seen on
the smooth skin
and there's nothing else it might have
been a crate
if the bite starts swelling it was
probably a cobra
you start feeling dizzy hot and sweating
right away
but that's not venom yet it's you you're
scared of seeing those bite marks
and the hormones adrenaline and cortisol
rush from your adrenal glands into your
blood
to make you blush and tremble your
hearts beating faster now
helping the venom spread more rapidly
soon
you'll start feeling stomach pain and
cramps the toxic
enzymes in the snake's venom are
reacting with your blood
getting to internal organs and muscles
they're all close to each other so the
toxic stuff hits them quickly and
aggressively
and when the venom has gone through your
liver kidneys and heart
which takes about 15 minutes it spreads
to the nerve endings
it's at this point you begin losing
touch with reality
literally at first your eyelids will
become increasingly heavy
eyelid muscles are some of the smallest
in the body and have few nerves
which makes them an easy target for
venom then the toxins go on and on
through your circulation
filling your smaller blood vessels like
a sponge and as they do
nerves stop functioning from your head
down because they're controlled by the
brain
it's just getting worse isn't it
from your eyes the numbness spreads
across your face
your lips and cheeks become tight making
you look as if you're annoyed with
something
within an hour or two you will lose the
ability to speak and see
the nerves in your face will have turned
off completely but the effects of the
bite will go
further down short-circuiting your
tongue lower jaw
neck diaphragm oh boy when this happens
unfortunately
you're almost beyond rescue if the
diaphragm stops responding
your lungs can't function properly and
you stop breathing
and we really shouldn't do that
if you're lucky enough though the bite
could be light and then the numbness
will not affect your vital systems
it'll still spread from the head down
your whole body but
won't be able to get deep inside going
through your top layers so to say
you might lose feelings in your fingers
and toes your skin
and even be unable to move properly but
if you can see and breathe
the symptoms might go away by themselves
in a few days
don't bet on that though and call the
ambulance as soon as you realize
something's wrong
finally all this may be completely
irrelevant to you
because what you feel is not numbness
it's heartache
both cobras and elapids have a type of
venom that goes straight for your heart
when it gets there and that's pretty
soon it might make the main
muscle of your body beat faster or
slower as well as causing irregular
beating
this is a huge strain on your heart you
know what to do
other muscles can also be affected
especially by sea snake venom
it has special toxins that target
muscles and as your eyes get heavy
you might also feel cramps first in your
stomach and then
rapidly spreading to your arms legs and
chest you will have trouble moving
because your muscles will grow stiff and
touching anything will become an ordeal
because of the tenderness
in the end the venom may make you lie in
bed and wait until it goes away
if it goes away boy let's just pile on
shall we
now if you look at the bite mark and see
it's swelling
and there's blood from the two punctures
it means you've been bitten by a viper
this venom acts differently and is even
more terrifying
oh gee its molecules are larger and
can't spread so quickly in the
bloodstream
that's why they head for your lymph
nodes and act from there
as a result the venom is slow and
painful
at first you will only feel scared and
dizzy because of that
then after 15 minutes the venom will
start spreading through your body
beginning from where the viper bits you
the thick and viscous substance will
mess with your blood
making it clot and causing bruises the
higher it goes
the more of your body it affects but
this progress is slow
compared to the effects of cobra and
elapid bites
if you don't get medical help you will
notice the swelling growing every hour
as the venom works its way through your
lymph it will make it go
against you causing even more swelling
lymph is your body's primary defensive
barrier
it's a fluid that contains white blood
cells which fight diseases
venom gets into their ranks and causes
disarray
white blood cells attack it to no avail
and it spreads
ever further and when the vile thing
reaches lymph nodes
they swell desperately trying to get rid
of the intruder
production of lymph increases and the
bitten part of your body gets more
swollen by the hour
depending on the potency and amount of
venom your limb will grow
twice in size by day two or three from
that bite
since we're talking about your ankle
it's your whole leg that will get
afflicted
foot to hip you won't be able to walk of
course and sitting will also be off
limits
the only hope at this stage is to lie in
bed and try not to move
even this late there's still a chance
your body will cure itself
but if there's any possibility to get
you to the hospital
what do you think yeah you should still
do it what the heck
when bitten by a snake you might panic
and do it all wrong
so increase your chances of survival by
calming yourself down
fear will make your heart beat faster
pumping blood through your body and with
that
the venom it still needs time to reach
your circulation
so stay calm and lie down
keeping the bitten limb below your heart
gravity will do the job then
don't ever try to suck the venom out of
the wound it spreads too rapidly for you
to help yourself
you won't even get a drop of it out this
way but only increase your heart rate
again by straining
put away that knife and never try to cut
the bite to let out the venom
like i said it's already in your blood
and you can make matters worse by
cutting
if you didn't have infection inside the
wound you might get it from that knife
applying cold won't help either cold
restricts normal blood flow
making venom stay where it is and doing
more damage to a single place
venom might also make tissues more
vulnerable to frostbite
you could end up losing a limp same goes
for tight bandages and tourniquets
when blood flows freely it lets the
venom spread of course
but also dilutes it making the substance
less potent
the bite might not be as dangerous as
you think
but by applying a tight bandage you can
triple its power
hey look you made it you're in the good
place
wait a minute uh-oh never mind